# 2 General Instructions

## 2.1 Direct sources for this protocol

This protocol has evolved from publications, Manuals of Operations and Procedures from various research studies, translations to other languages, examiner training and calibration, and formal reliability studies. It is not possible to credit specific sources for given procedures due to the highly collaborative contributions from the various sources as identified in 1.5 Acknowledgments.

## 2.2 Overview of examination

**(a) Patients and examiners.** The individual to be examined is always termed "patient" throughout this document; for research contexts, substitute the term "subject" or "participant". "Examiner" refers to the individual performing the examination.

**(b) Scope and context of examination.** The DC/TMD examination is comprised of a core set of reliable and valid procedures, and for use in a clinical setting, these procedures may need to be augmented by additional procedures as indicated by the differential diagnosis. Consequently, a clinical evaluation does not necessarily end with the procedures defined in this protocol. Clinical procedures for musculoskeletal evaluation pertaining to temporomandibular disorders can be divided into three groups:

- procedures considered reliable, valid, and essential for the core TMD examination, and these procedures are presented in detail in Section 3;
- procedures considered reliable and valid but not essential for the core examination, and these procedures may be found in other sources; and
- procedures that are necessary for purposes of the differential diagnosis, even though they may lack supporting evidence for reliability and validity; these procedures may be found in other sources.

**(c) Restrictions imposed by diagnostic criteria.** The criteria for diagnosis, such as requiring pain to be present in the last 30 days, are linked to the broader goal of pain evaluation and diagnosis. These specifications assume, for consistency, a 30-day period. However, limiting a diagnosis to pain that was present during the last 30 days may not be sensible for a given complaint (e.g., cluster headache, when the patient seeks consultation during the period between bouts; or painful jaw locking that was last present 6 months previously but the patient has not consulted with someone until now) or a given setting (e.g., specialty practice with extremely long wait times to get an appointment). A formal frame for diagnosis is intended to provide efficient evaluation for the majority of patients, as demonstrated by the DC/TMD validity data; going outside that frame is expected when the signs or symptoms so dictate. Whether the evaluation is inside or outside a given differential diagnostic frame, formal tools provide consistently better clinical data.

**(d) Clinical vs research applications.** The core procedures described in these specifications are sufficient for a comprehensive clinical examination for the large majority of individuals with a TMD. The selection of core tests attempted to balance reliability of the procedure (and the related diagnostic validity), efficiency, and inclusiveness. For clinical purposes, the examiner must make the decision regarding which additional tests to perform. For research purposes, this protocol is sufficient to address the diagnostic criteria described in Schiffman et al, 2013. Particular aspects of the examination specifically relevant for research purposes are addressed in Section 10.

## 2.3 Patient Management

**(a) Patient positioning.** These specifications are written from the perspective that the patient is sitting comfortably upright in a chair that can be adjusted for height. In a given setting, however, other positions are acceptable, and the patient position in the chair should be adjusted for greatest comfort for both patient and examiner.

**(b) Examiner positioning.** These specifications are written from the perspective that the examiner is standing to the patient's right and facing the patient. This position allows the examiner to perform the full examination using each hand as required while the other hand is used to stabilize the patient's head or mandible. For procedures that occur on one side of the jaw or head at a time (i.e., lateral jaw movements, palpation), the intent is for the examiner to use the right and left hands symmetrically; for example, the examiner uses his/her left hand to palpate the patient's right side, and the right hand to palpate the patient's left side. If alterations in this basic setup of patient sitting upright and examiner standing to the patient's right are needed (e.g., a patient has a medical condition and needs to sit in a reclined chair; examiner preference), the examiner will likely need to modify his/her position relative to the patient, perhaps to sit behind the patient. All sided-instructions should be modified accordingly.

**(c) Jaw posture.** There are three static jaw postures used in this examination: comfort position, where the mouth is closed (i.e., lips touching, for most individuals) and teeth are not touching; maximal intercuspal position (MICP), where the jaw is closed and teeth are fully touching; and where the jaw is held at the end of a movement (e.g., opening). Unless instructions indicate otherwise, the jaw should be in the comfort position. Procedures requesting that the patient bring the teeth together refer to the MICP; MICP is obtained by asking the patient to "put your back teeth completely together", and the additional phrase "where your back teeth fit together best" can be used as needed in order to help the patient accomplish that goal. MICP in patients with dual bite should be obtained by asking the patient to close teeth together with the mandible in the more posterior position.

**(d) Replacement prostheses.** Patients with replacement prostheses will be examined with the prostheses in their mouth if the prosthesis is stable. If the replacement prosthesis is loose, the examiner will stabilize it if possible by compressing it against the ridge for measurements that use the teeth as a landmark. If the prosthesis cannot be stabilized, then it should be removed; Section 11 of the examination form should indicate that the prosthesis was removed, and the measurements are taken using soft-tissue reference points which are also noted in Section 11.

**(e) Bite plates and other removable appliances that do not replace teeth.** These are removed at the beginning of the examination.

**(f) Instructions to the patient.** Examiner pacing, with respect to pauses and inflection of voice, are generally sufficient to manage the back-and-forth flow of instructions by examiner and action by patient. If necessary, the patient should be reminded to listen to the complete instruction before performing the requested function.

## 2.4 Completing the Examination

**(a) Sequencing of examination procedures.** The examination data collection follows the sequence of tests as specified in Section 5, Complete Specifications for DC/TMD Examination.

**(b) Completing all items.** All interview and examination items need to be completed unless the patient refuses or is unable to cooperate. In this case, write "RF" (Refusal) on the examination form adjacent to the relevant examination item. When the procedure is incomplete due to refusal, no information is entered other than indicating that the patient refused.

**(c) Repeating examination items.** The examiner can repeat a procedure if the finding is inconsistent, if the patient was unable to provide a clear response, or if the patient requests that the procedure be repeated.

**(d) Physical barriers to examination.** Patients may present with a beard, a neck brace, hair weavings, or any other potential physical barriers which may interfere with the examination.

## 2.5 Measurements and Movements

**(a) Ruler preparation.** If necessary, a mm ruler is prepared by cutting off the end at the zero mark in order to make the end even with the '0' mark. The width of the ruler at the cut end should be sufficient to allow the ruler to be placed on an incisal edge without slipping. The non-measurement edge of the ruler may need to be trimmed back for a few cm at the '0' end in order to create space for the lip when placing the '0' end of the ruler against the maxillary incisors.

**(b) Millimeter measurements.** All millimeter measurements will be recorded as double digits; for example, a measurement of 41.7mm is rounded to 41mm and recorded only as an integer number. For values less than 10, the observed value is preceded by a leading zero. Measurements are rounded down to the nearest integer and recorded only as integer numbers. Each of overbite, overjet, and protrusive mandibular movement can take on a negative sign, indicated by checking the appropriate box on the examination form.

**(c) Measurements of range of motion.** Millimeter measurements of opening, protrusive, and lateral excursive movements are recorded as described in the specifications. Measurement of incisal relations is included in the examination in order for measured extent of movement to accurately reflect the full extent of movement for opening and protrusive excursions of the mandible. The examiner does not do these corrections during the examination; rather, the examiner records the observed values, and any adjustments are made after the examination is completed in order to compute actual mobility.

1. **Vertical movements** of the mandible are corrected by adding the vertical overlap; if the vertical incisal overlap is negative due to an anterior open bite, then the negative overlap is added to the observed extent of vertical movement.

2. **Lateral excursions** are corrected by adding or subtracting the midline discrepancy, as determined by the direction of any discrepancy between the maxillary and mandibular midlines. If any midline discrepancy has been negated via creation of an arbitrary reference midline, the principle remains the same but the value that is added or subtracted is '0'.

3. **Protrusive movements** are corrected by adding the measurement of protrusive movements to the horizontal overjet. When an anterior crossbite or prognathic relationship occurs, the negative overjet is added to the protrusive movement. And when a severe overjet (recorded as a positive number) is accompanied by mandibular protrusion that remains posterior to the maxillary teeth (recorded as a negative number), the sum of the two values correctly indicates the extent of mandibular movement in the protrusive direction.

**(d) Movement even with pain.** With one exception [**Pain-free opening**], every time the patient moves his/her mouth vertically or excursively, he or she is instructed to move it as far as possible in that direction, even if it is painful.

**(e) Movement without guidance.** Movements for range of motion and for joint sounds are made without any assistance by the examiner. Only for **Maximum Assisted Opening** is the jaw actively pushed on by the examiner. The examiner can touch the patient to provide non-verbal cues for the direction of intended movement.

## 2.6 Classification of Anatomic Structures

**(a) Description of problem.** When the patient points to the location where he or she feels pain (e.g., by history or from the examination), it may be obvious as to which structure is associated with the complaint or, if the patient points to either the preauricular area or to the boundary of a structure – e.g., anterior area of the masseter muscle – it may not be obvious. When pointing to the preauricular area, the structures associated with a pain complaint may be joint, muscle, or both; when pointing to the marginal area of a muscle, the structures associated with a pain complaint may not be within the muscle tissue at all. The following procedures, when consistently followed, will provide reliable identification of which structure (muscle, joint, or other structure) is associated with the reported pain.

**(b) Identify involved areas of pain.** The first time that a participant points to a location that is uncertain in terms of anatomical identity, the examiner will investigate the possible underlying structures. Subsequent pointing by the participant to that same location should allow the examiner to code the structure(s), based on the initial inquiry.

1. **Patient points to pain locations.** When a patient indicates that a mobility test is painful, the examiner determines the location(s) of the pain induced during the procedure by asking the patient to *point* to each area of pain with one fingertip or to show the area of involvement by "painting" the boundary with a fingertip. The examiner then determines what area(s) the patient has indicated and then records all of the selected locations (as available, depending on the item): temporalis, masseter, sub-mandibular, posterior mandibular, lateral pterygoid, temporalis tendon, and TMJ. These pain-site locations are independent. If the patient reports the location of the pain as, for example, "my joint", the examiner will ask the patient to point to or show the location.

2. **Examiner touches area.** It is essential that the examiner correctly identifies the area(s) that the patient is indicating. To insure accuracy, the examiner can place his/her finger on the area(s), and/or the patient can place the examiner's finger on the area(s) that the patient indicates as the location(s) of his/her pain.

3. **Examiner touches uncertain areas.** If the locations of pain indicated by the patient are unclear to the examiner, the examiner can touch areas *outside* of the area the patient indicated in order to confirm that that touched area is not part of the pain.

**(c) Classify structures.** The next step is for the examiner to classify the indicated area(s).

1. **Preauricular area.** If it is unclear to the examiner whether the patient is indicating a joint, masticatory muscle, or both when the patient points to the pre-auricular area, the identification of the underlying structure(s) requires two steps to determine the location of anatomic landmarks for the boundaries of the condyle and of the masseter muscle.

   i. **Step 1:** Identify the location of the condyle. If the condyle can be readily palpated, application of light pressure to the skin overlying the presumed location of the condyle while the mandible is held in a comfortable position of closure may be sufficient to identify the condylar landmarks and relate to the area of pain as identified by the patient. If the condyle landmark cannot be readily identified via light pressure palpation, then the condyle should be translated (either via opening or protrusion) in order to accurately localize the structure. While the examiner places his/her finger on the area indicated by the patient as the pain site, the examiner asks the patient: "Move your jaw forward (straight out in front of you) until I ask you to stop and then slide your jaw back to a comfortable position". The examiner notes the location of the condyle landmark in relation to the area of pain identified by the patient and localized by the examiner's finger, and determines if the area of pain complaint is associated with the condyle or not.

   ii. **Step 2:** Identify the posterior (dorsal) boundary of the masseter muscle. The examiner asks; "Now, gently clench your teeth together, and relax".

2. **Muscle margin.** If the examiner needs to localize specific masticatory muscle area(s), s/he can ask the patient, for example in the masseter or temporalis region: "I would like you to clench your teeth together gently and then relax your jaw with your teeth slightly apart from each other." Other maneuvers could be requested as well, depending on the specific muscle group that needs to be identified. If the pain complaint is located near a muscle margin and it is not clear whether the pain is localized in association with the muscle by the patient or not, then the examiner asks the patient to clench (or move the mandible against light resistance) and palpate in order to localize the muscle boundaries.

3. **The problem of dynamic movement.** During maximal opening movements in particular and sometimes with lateral or protrusive excursive movements, the condyle will move anteriorly such that it is deep to overlying masseter muscle. When asking the patient where the pain was during the preceding procedure, the patient may point to the area anterior to the condyle in its closed position. The patient may be pointing to the masseter muscle (for example) but the patient may instead (or also) be pointing to the location of where the condyle was. When the pain during the maneuver is caused in part or in whole by the condyle in an anteriorly translated position, light pressure to the reported pain area (while the patient's mandible is in the closed position) by the examiner and inquiring into if that was the pain just experienced may lead to an unsure patient response. If so, repeat the opening or excursive procedure and then identify the location (and underlying structure) of any pain while the mandible is in the open or excursive position. The patient may also be asked if the "pain was coming from the part that was moving".

4. **Intra-oral.** If the pain complaint is located inside the mouth, it can be more difficult to accurately classify the structure. An efficient method is the following: (1) ask patient to point to the area that was painful in response to the procedure; (2) the examiner then uses his/her finger, and if necessary asks the patient to hold the examiner's finger and to touch the area again; and (3) the examiner then classifies the area that was touched.

5. **Referred pain.** When pain is referred to a deep structure, it is very difficult for the patient to show the location. Nevertheless, ask the patient to point to the surface of where the deep pain is, and then classify accordingly.

**(d) Examiner makes the decision.** The examiner's decision regarding localization is made based on the examiner's determination of structure(s).

**(e) Record the pain-relevant structure** as follows, based on the area of pain as localized by the patient and as touched by the examiner during the movements:

1. **"Joint":** If the lateral pole is felt by the examiner's finger when placed in the area of pain complaint and while the mandible is in the "comfortable position" – i.e., *after* (compare to during) the patient protrudes/returns to his/her "comfortable position".

2. **"Masseter muscle":** If muscle contraction during clenching can be felt by the finger when placed in the area of pain complaint;

3. The examiner's decision is made based on subject feedback as well as examiner findings. For example, if the patient indicates pain "in the joint" but the examiner identifies the location as muscle based on accurate localization, the examiner would record only "muscle" as the location of the pain.

4. Both "joint" and "muscle" can be identified as location of pain complaint in the preauricular region.

## 2.7 Verification that reported history of pain is in TMD structures

**(a) Examiner verifies pain location by history.** Diagnosis according to the DC/TMD requires that self-report of complainant pain be verified by the examiner as pain that is located within the masticatory system. The examiner verifies pain by history by touching the areas of interest and asking if pain has been present in those areas. The time frame for a DC/TMD diagnosis is the prior 30 days, but this may require modification depending on circumstances. The examiner should note in Section 11 if a different time period was used.

**(b) Patient inquiry.** A pain history questionnaire, such as the DC/TMD Symptom Questionnaire, will typically inquire into the presence of pain. However, any such positive responses are verified by the examiner who will directly inquire, as the first question in the examination (Examiner Confirmation of Pain and Headache Location), regarding the presence and location of facial pain. The examiner may need to explain to the patient that temple "pain" may be different from "headache" or they may be the same or different – all depending on the patient's pain experience. Neutral probes are used for exploring any report of "headache" vs "pain".

**(c) Iterative evaluation of pain location by history.** As the examination proceeds and the patient reports familiar pain in response to each procedure, the patient may report additional area(s) of pain not previously reported in response to the first examination question (E1); the first question of the examination form (E1) should be updated as necessary so that all areas of pain in the prior 30 days are reported in E1.

## 2.8 Palpation

**(a) Selection of palpation sites.** Research data indicate that palpation procedures to the masseter and temporalis muscles are the most reliable, and, more importantly, data from the Validation Project demonstrate that these two muscles bilaterally are sufficient for diagnostic yield 99% of the time. Although the false negative rate by only using these two muscles bilaterally is therefore about 1%, in clinical settings it may still be useful to include the less reliable masticatory muscles for palpation in order to provide a comprehensive examination (see Section 3) relative to the patient's complaint. That is, if the masseter temporalis muscles are negative for pain from the examination, examination of any of the other supplemental muscles (lateral pterygoid area, posterior mandibular area, submandibular area, temporalis tendon) may be positive and allow for a myofascial pain diagnosis in the masticatory muscles. Only using the masseter and temporalis for palpation yields an examination that is targeted and more efficient, with only slightly less diagnostic sensitivity.

**(b) Basic screening palpation.** Palpation for pain is performed by applying pressure, which is either 0.5 kg or 1.0 kg, depending on the procedure or structure, in order to test for a pain response. This procedure should be distinguished from lighter pressure used in touching the skin in order to identify location of reported pain and identification of the structures beneath the skin. Palpation for pain consists of two phases: initial contact with the skin and ramping the pressure to the desired target (ramp phase), and maintaining that pressure for a sufficient duration (steady-force phase). Patients report that they do not regard "touch and go" palpation (i.e., very brief application of pressure at an area) as satisfactory for their feeling confident about whether they experienced pain in response to the palpation pressure. Consequently, after ramping the pressure up to the desired magnitude, a steady level of palpation pressure needs to be maintained for at least one full second, recognizing that part of a 2-second palpation procedure will include time for ramping up to the target pressure and ramping down from the target pressure.

**(c) How many fingers?** One finger is recommended in order to best standardize the examination. Two fingers are often used in clinical settings but require more complex calibration procedures to achieve reliable assessment.

**(d) Simultaneous bilateral palpation?** Examining both sides at the same time is more efficient than doing one side at a time. However, obtaining maximal reliability in the necessary patient report of pain, whether the pain is familiar and whether the pain refers to another structure, is facilitated by examining one side at a time. This protocol is designed toward examining only one side at a time.

**(e) Palpation duration.** The application of suitable pressure for assessing pain from palpation requires that each screening palpation procedure have a duration of at least 2 seconds, if a myalgia diagnosis is to be provided and for at least 5 seconds if a diagnosis of any one of the myalgia types (local myalgia, myofascial pain with spreading, or myofascial referred pain) is to be provided. The following method, using a timing phrase of "one-thousand 1, one-thousand 2", will lead to palpation duration of about two seconds, with the steady-force phase lasting about 1 second. The onset of finger contact with the underlying surface occurs with the first "**one**-" (of "**one**-thousand 1"), full target force is developed by the end of that phrase at "**1**" (of "one-thousand **1**"), and pressure offset occurs with "**2**" (of "one-thousand **2**"). The short phrase "press, hold, release" might be useful as a mental reminder during each procedure. This procedure is modified appropriately if a 5 second palpation is used; even better, however, for a 5 second palpation is to time pressure application according to a wall clock.

**(f) Palpation calibration.** A critical skill for reliable palpation is producing the proper force in a steady manner which requires on-going skill development and maintenance. The examiner should train him/herself using an appropriate force-measuring device such as a digital postage scale or a suitable handheld algometer. Each instrument has specific benefits. The digital postage scale is very accurate and responsive to ongoing pressure application but does not have a form-factor that is useful in the clinic setting. See Section 10 for further information regarding the calibration process. Calibration by the examiner of his or her fingers for each type of pressure just before doing that part of the examination is recommended.

**(g) Procedure.** After instructing the patient (see Section 5 or 8 for detailed verbal instructions), the examiner then palpates each targeted spot by ramping up to the target pressure (e.g., 1.0 kg) and holding the pressure for the specified time. The recommended time periods are either for 2 seconds (if only a diagnosis of myalgia is of interest or concern) or for 5 seconds (if a diagnosis of referred pain is also of interest). Then, the Familiar Pain Inquiry is done, and if positive, the Referred Pain Inquiry. All of the accessible muscle should be palpated. The examiner may additionally focus on specific sites within a muscle, as indicated by the circumstances (e.g., patient complaint that suggests referred pain and a possible anatomic source for that referred pain).

**(h) Confirmation of pain absence.** During the palpation procedures, the patient is instructed to report pain following application of pressure. Some examiners prefer to have a patient say "yes" or "no" after each procedure, whereas others prefer to only hear "yes", if applicable. A hybrid procedure is to inquire at the end of each temporalis or masseter zone or after each muscle, as appropriate, with the question, "any pain?" or "there was no pain?" in order to confirm that the absence of pain reports is due to the absence of pain.

## 2.9 Familiar Pain

**(a) "Familiar pain" definition and rationale.** If a patient reports "pain" to an examination procedure, the examiner will ask the patient if the pain is familiar and "familiar" is always in relation to the pain complaint outside the clinic setting. For a patient, this pain is most likely the reason why the patient is seeking consultation or treatment. For the purposes of the DC/TMD, "familiar" pain is defined as pain that is "similar" or "like" the individual's clinical pain, regardless of its intensity from the clinical procedure vs the typical clinical pain, and experienced by the patient in the reference anatomical region within the prior 30 days. Another way to define the term, in the context of a clinical examination, is reproduction of the pain qualia in response to clinical provocation. The examiner reminds the patient, as needed, that the goal of the examination is to replicate (duplicate) the patient's pain in order to locate the source. "Familiar" pain is included as a criterion for a pain diagnosis because replication of pain, in terms of differential diagnosis, is essential; the necessary goal in establishing the presence of replication is for the patient to describe the provoked pain in the same way as the pain of complaint, because it is the same type of pain. Moreover, the "familiar" pain probe provides the examiner an opportunity to more fully explore the patient's pain experience by also inquiring into the context, frequency, and location of any elicited pain symptoms in order to determine their relevance to the chief complaint. The examiner then integrates this information into the history in order to create a coherent set of findings that reduce the discrepancy between reported symptoms vs signs and which supports the diagnoses.

**(b) "Familiar pain" probe.** For any procedure that produces pain, the examiner asks as a follow-up probe whether that pain is familiar to the pain that the patient may have experienced in this region in the past 30 days. A "yes" response is followed by the probe, "Familiar to what?" in order to elicit a description of the context in which the pain experience occurred; one type of response points to an event associated with the pain (e.g., chewing gum). Clinical patients who experience pain much or all of the time will more often respond to the "familiar to what?" probe with a response such as "the pain I am seeking care for".

**(c) Time period for pain.** For DC/TMD pain diagnoses, the standard time period for a diagnosis is pain within the prior 30 days. This means that for **Familiar Pain** to be endorsed as [yes], the pain must have occurred within the prior 30 days; pains that occurred previous to the recent 30-day period are not acceptable for **Familiar Pain** at the time of the examination per the DC/TMD 30-day time period and are recorded as [no]. Certain protocols or specific clinical situations may require that this time period be modified, but that should be documented in the clinical record. And, it should be carefully explained in any publication that cites the methods being used. Note that the ICHD-2 criteria require that headache be present within the prior 3 months in order for the disorder to be classifiable. In certain settings, the user may way to modify the time period for headache pain accordingly.

**(d) Complicating factors.** There are three issues which affect the patient's report regarding possible familiar pain: location, temporal characteristics, and intensity. Location and temporal characteristics are readily addressed through appropriate probes, while the intensity characteristic is more complex.

1. **Location characteristics.** For unilateral pain complaints (that is, a patient is asymptomatic on one side and symptomatic on the other side within the past 30 days), if the patient says that procedure-induced pain on the asymptomatic side is "familiar", the examiner should probe as follows:

   i. verify side(s) and specific locations of symptoms in the past 30 days;

   ii. verify that the familiar pain within a side that had been reported as asymptomatic (E1) occurred within the past 30 days and verify that the pain was familiar;

   iii. return to E1 and update accordingly.

2. **Intensity characteristics.** The intent is to capture the qualitative characteristics of the pain that are "like" or "similar to" their pain experience. When intensity is stated by the patient as the qualifying characteristic leading to a "no" response, the best probe is to ask, "Independent of intensity, is the pain you felt like or similar to your usual pain?" The examiner must be careful to adhere to the stated probe and to resist trying to explain the goal of the familiar pain probe to the patient.

**(e) Familiar Headache Pain.**

1. **Verify headache history.** The examiner determines whether the patient has a current history of headache. The presence of headache(s) in the temporal area(s) is assessed by (1) reviewing the appropriate section of the DC-TMD Symptom Questionnaire, (2) asking the patient about headache locations as the first part of the examination, and (3) inquiring into headache during the first instance when the patient reports "familiar pain" in the temporalis muscle from any procedure. If a patient reports more than one type of headache in the temporal area, examination procedures that produce temporalis area pain are followed by inquiry regarding **Familiar Headache** with respect to *any* headache pain located in that area, within the past 30 days; the inquiry is not restricted to any specific headache type. If the patient is positive for history of temporal-area headache, then the examiner determines whether the procedure-induced pain replicates the patient's temporal area headache by asking the patient, "When you opened your mouth widely and it was painful, was that pain like your headache in this part of your head?" or "When I pressed on the area, was that pain like your headache in this part of your head?" Clarification of this question for the patient is done as with Familiar Pain (above).

2. **"Headache" vs "pain".** Note that the examiner will inquire about **Familiar Headache** even if the patient reports that the procedure-induced pain is not **Familiar Pain**. While this may seem contradictory, individuals do report headaches as different from "pain". If the patient asks if it is sensible for a pain to not be familiar while the headache is familiar, the examiner will say "yes".

## 2.10 Referred Pain

**(a) Definition.** Pain is considered *referred pain* if the patient reports pain beyond the boundary of the muscle or joint being palpated (i.e., perceived in another structure). It is not referred pain if the patient reports pain extending beyond the area of provocation but only within the boundary of the muscle or joint.

**(b) Localization.** If the patient reports pain as a result of muscle or TMJ palpation, the patient is asked if s/he felt pain anywhere else (i.e., in any other structure) beyond the immediate area of the examiner's palpation, and if so to point to that area. If the site of any referred pain is deep, then the patient should still be asked to point to the skin (or mucosa) overlying the deep area.

**(c) Spreading pain.** The DC/TMD includes a placeholder for "spreading pain", defined as pain that extends beyond the area of nociceptive stimulation but not beyond the boundary of the muscle being palpated.

## 2.11 Examination-related Pain Interview

**(a) Interview structure.** There is a standard set of questions related to the examination-based interview of presence of pain, whether it is familiar pain, whether it is familiar headache, and where the pain is perceived. The inquiry into pain starts with an examination-specific question based on the particular procedure. This initial question is prompted after each relevant procedure in the Specifications; the specific questions for each type of clinical procedure are listed at the beginning of Section 5. The pain interview is comprised of a standard hierarchy of questions. Additional questions are needed if the patient responds in other ways, and such questions should follow the intent of the specific questions described here.

**(b) Ambiguous responses from patient.** When requested, the patient must clearly indicate "pain" or "no pain". If the patient provides other descriptors (e.g., achiness, tightness, pressure, uncomfortable, etc), the examiner will clarify this with "Is that pain or not?" If headache is a primary focus of the examination, then this question may need to be modified, such as "Is that headache pain or not?" No other question is provided for addressing this particular ambiguity, as any other question will tend to have leading characteristics. For other forms of ambiguity, the intent is to clarify and not to lead the patient towards making specific responses.

**(c) Repeat questioning.** A simple question such as "Did you feel pain [from that procedure]?" may be shortened after the first few uses of it, to "Pain?". Examiners are encouraged to develop shorthand versions of the repeated items within the Examination-related Pain Interview for use with a given patient *after* the patient understands the intent of the question. Another example is the repeat question of "Show me where you felt pain" followed by the question "Were there any other areas?"; the latter question is repeated until the patient says "no". The first time that this form of questioning occurs, such as in E1 (Pain location), is an opportunity to review with the patient that inclusive reporting of all pain locations is requested.

**(d) Efficient Completion of the Examination-related Pain Interview.** After the first several positive responses from the pain provoking procedures, the examiner can instruct the patient to respond in an abbreviated form. For example, the patient might be instructed to report, in response to positive palpation findings, as follows: "yes, familiar" or "yes, not familiar".

## 2.12 Examination Form

**(a) Overview.** The DC/TMD includes an examination form which standardizes the examination and the recording of findings. This form, Section 9 and available on the website as a stand-alone document, is inclusive of all procedures described in this protocol. The form is available in versions for the US and for international settings.

**(b) Completion of all items.** Unless a procedure is indicated as supplementary, the procedure should be completed. Completion of a procedure does not mean that all response bubbles have to be completed (see next section for further explanation). Rather, the form is intended to be a record of what is normal as well as abnormal, hence reporting negative findings (as [N]) is as important as reporting positive findings. Completion of all items relevant to a given complaint also supports reliable decision-making. Procedures noted as "supplementary" are used as indicated by the clinical circumstance. If the examination form is used for a screening examination, then only items indicated for the type of screening examination would be completed.

**(c) Form structure logic.** While all items should be completed, not all response fields need to be completed. Parts 1, 2, and 3 are typical checklists. The remaining sections of the examination utilize a conditional reporting format.

1. If the response from the initial inquiry about presence of pain from the procedure is reported by the patient as "no", then record [N]. All other response options for that item are left blank since no response is needed.

2. If initial inquiry response about presence of pain is "yes", the examiner records [Y] to **Pain**. Then the examiner will ask a series of further questions depending on the type of examination procedure that induced the pain.

3. **Familiar Pain** and **Familiar Headache** co-exist as parallel forms of inquiry because some individuals will report temporalis area "pain" as different from temporalis "headache" with respect to an examination procedure provoking that particular pain or headache experience. This was addressed in section 2.9.

4. A response for **Referred Pain** is recorded if **Pain** is "yes" and independent of whether **Familiar Pain** or **Familiar Headache** are "yes".

5. **Example.** In Part 4B, if the patient reports pain only in the right temporalis and right masseter during maximum unassisted opening, [Y] would be marked in the Pain column for the right temporalis and the examiner would proceed with the Examination-related Pain Interview, asking if the pain was familiar, if the provoked pain (or noxious experience) was familiar to headache, and if the pain was referred. For the masseter muscle, the Examination-related Pain Interview would address if the pain was familiar and if the pain was referred. For all other muscles and both TMJs, [N] is marked in the Pain column and because the remaining columns are not applicable, they are left blank.

**(d) Description of the form structure.** The conditional sections of the examination form are as follows.

Parts 4 and 5 use the conditional structure as described above under (c), and illustrated with the example at (c)5.

In Parts 6 and 7, mandatory response fields are listed under *Examiner* and *Patient*. The examiner section and the patient-report section are separated by a vertical line. The patient-report section starts the conditional response fields which are completed only if the patient reports 'yes' (recorded as [Y]) to the presence of a clicking sound; the examiner then begins the Examination-Related Pain Interview relevant to joint sounds.

In part 8, *Locking* is reported as an observed event during any part of the examination, and the response fields for *Reduction* are completed. If Locking is reported as "no", then the remaining fields for that type of locking in that joint are left blank.

In Parts 9 and 10, if *Pain* to palpation is not reported, then [N] is marked and the remainder of the row for that muscle is left blank. If **Pain** to palpation is reported, then a prolonged palpation is performed and the Examination-related Pain Interview is used for completion of the **Familiar Pain** and, if applicable, **Familiar Headache**, and then **Referred Pain**.

**(e) Temporalis and masseter palpation.** The examination form attached to this protocol has 3 report fields for each of temporalis and masseter, each field corresponding to a delineated palpation zone. The purpose of zones within these muscles is to enhance structured training and systematic practice. In a clinical setting, only the diagnosis may be of interest, and if familiar pain, familiar headache, and referred pain are obtained from the first site examined within the temporalis, the examiner could easily conclude examination of that muscle and move on to the next part of the examination (masseter palpation). In this example, no zones would be needed on the exam form. In contrast, if an examiner wishes to be thorough, the present form provides self-evident documentation of what was performed. Other examination forms are available on the Consortium website – for example, one that just lists temporalis and masseter (without zones); the level of detail in terms of recording findings from these two muscles is up to the examiner.

**(f) Examiner Comments.** Section 11 of the examination form provides a space to write additional information. This is optional.

**(g) Form modification.** An experienced clinician may wish to use additional procedures for a given patient depending on the nature of the complaint. For a given setting, the form may also be modified by eliminating all supplemental procedures (notably, jaw-opening pattern, supplemental muscle palpations); if the supplemental muscle palpations are removed, the user should evaluate the standard response options for E4 and E5, in that perhaps only temporalis and masseter pain, as areas reported by the patient during mobility testing, are of interest for the myalgia and myofascial pain diagnoses. Similarly, if a user is not interested in referred patterns associated with palpation, then the "Referred Pain" field may be removed from E9 and E10; the palpation procedure could be similarly modified, as described in the Protocol.

**(h) Efficient completion of the examination.** An assistant for recording examination findings permits the examination to be completed much more quickly. The accompanying video demonstrates a suggested dictation style.
